%% Chapter 2
\documentclass[diss]{subfiles}
\input{ch2-notes.tex}
\begin{document}

\chapter{Fifths Spaces}

Because most jazz is not purely diatonic, we need to expand our
transformational system to account for more chromatic examples. This chapter
will begin that work, taking the very common \tfo\ progression as its basis.
Most of the spaces we will develop in this chapter will fall under the broad
category of “fifths spaces,” but at the end of the chapter we will have
occasion to return to the diatonic space of chapter 1 to see how they might be
enhanced with the chromatic spaces introduced here.

% xxx this title is stupid
\section{\tf\ Space: An Initial Pass}

% {{{

The most common harmonic progression in jazz is undoubtedly the
\mbox{ii\tsup{7}--V\tsup{7}--I\tsup{7}} progression (hereafter, just \tfo, or
often just \tf). It is the first progression taught in most jazz method books,
and the only small-scale harmonic progression to have an entire Aebersold
play-along volume dedicated to it.\fn{tf-1} The progression is so prevalent
that many jazz musicians describe tunes in terms of their constituent \tf{}s;
a musician might describe the bridge of “All the Things You Are” (shown in
Example \ref{tf:all-things-bridge}) as being “\tf\ to G, \tf\ to E, then V--I
in F.”\fn{tf-2} Given the importance of the progression for improvising jazz
musicians, it seems natural to use the progression as the basis for developing
a more general transformational model of jazz harmony.

\exBeg[htbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/ch2/all-things-bridge.pdf}
  \caption{The bridge of “All the Things You Are” (Jerome Kern).}
  \label{tf:all-things-bridge}
\exEnd

\figBeg[htbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/xxx.pdf}
  \caption[A transformation network for a single \tfo\ progression.]{A
  transformation network for a \tfo\ in C major: \caph{Dm7}--\caph{G7}--\caph{CM7}.}
  \label{tf:single-tfo-network}
\figEnd

Figure \ref{tf:single-tfo-network} shows a transformation network for a single
\tfo\ progression; we will begin by developing the formal apparatus for this
progression, after which we can begin to combine \tfo\ progressions to form a
larger musical space. The illustration, with its combination of general Roman
numerals and specific key centers, is designed to reflect how jazz musicians
tend to talk about harmony; we might read this network as “a \tfo\ in C.” This
combination of Roman numerals and key areas bears some similarity to Fred
Lerdahl’s chordal-regional space, but Figure \ref{tf:single-tfo-network} is a
transformation network, while chordal-regional space is strictly a spatial
metaphor.\footcite[96--97]{lerdahl:2004}

We have encountered one transformation network already (in Figure
\ref{ds:autumn-leaves-bridge}), but we have yet to define the concept
formally.  Transformation networks are a major part of David Lewin’s project
in \emph{GMIT}, and have been thoroughly covered in the literature, so we will
not rehearse the formalism at any length here.\fn{tf-3} Briefly, a
transformation network consists of objects of some kind (here, they are
chords), represented as vertices in a graph, along with some relations between
them, represented as arrows. Lewin defines a transformation as “a function
from a family [set] S into S itself.”\fn{tf-4} The transformations in Figure
\ref{ds:autumn-leaves-bridge} are indeed Lewinnian transformations (mappings
in the G-minor diatonic set), but the \tfo\ transformation network is more
complex.

The transformation TF in Figure \ref{tf:single-tfo-network} is in fact a
\emph{cross-type} transformation, as defined by Julian
Hook.\footcite{hook:2007} Hook expands Lewin’s definition of a transformation
network to include objects of different types, necessary to define
transformations in the \tfo\ progression. The progression contains musical
objects of three types of diatonic seventh chords: minor, dominant,
and major sevenths (in the key of C major, the progression is
\h{Dm7}--\h{G7}--\h{CM7}). Using Hook’s relaxed definitions, we are free to
define transformations from any set of objects to any other; to understand the
figure above, we need to define the transformation TF such that it maps
ii\tsup{7} chords to V\tsup{7} chords, and V\tsup{7} chords to I\tsup{7}
chords.

\figBeg[htbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/xxx.pdf}
  \caption{The underlying transformation graph for a single \tfo\ progression.}
  \label{tf:single-tfo-graph}
\figEnd

Before defining the transformations, however, we first need to define the sets
themselves. To help with this, Figure \ref{tf:single-tfo-graph} shows the
underlying transformation graph of the transformation network in
\ref{tf:single-tfo-network}. Throughout \emph{GMIT}, Lewin is careful to
distinguish transformation graphs from transformation networks: a graph is an
abstract structure, showing only relations (transformations) between
unspecified set members, while a network realizes a graph, specifying the
actual musical objects under consideration.\fn{tf-5} Because cross-type
transformation graphs contain objects of different types, a node in a
cross-type transformation graph must be labeled with the set from which the
node contents may be drawn (even in a transformation
graph).\footcite[7]{hook:2007} In Figure \ref{tf:single-tfo-graph}, the nodes
are labeled simply $S_1$, $S_2$, and $S_3$, which we can understand as the
sets of ii\tsup{7}, V\tsup{7}, and I\tsup{7} chords, respectively.

While at its core the \tfo\ progression contains three types of seventh
chords, in reality a jazz musician might add any number of extensions or
alterations to this basic structure. Given this practice, defining the
archetypal progression as being composed of four-note set classes seems
unnecessarily restrictive. In order to allow for some freedom in the chord
qualities, we will consider only chordal roots, thirds, and sevenths; these
pitches are sufficient to distinguish the three chord qualities in a \tfo.

In this chapter, we will represent a chord with an ordered triple $X = (x_1,
x_2, x_3)$, where $x_1$ is the root of the chord, $x_2$ the third, and $x_3$
the seventh. The definitions of the three sets are as follows:\fn{tf-6}

\vspace{-3em} % xxx not sure why there’s so much space here
\begin{align*}
  S_1 &= \{ (x_1, x_2, x_3)\ |\ x_2 - x_1 = 3; x_3 - x_1 = 10 \} &
    \text{ii\tsup{7} chords} \\ %
  %
  S_2 &= \{ (x_1, x_2, x_3)\ |\ x_2 - x_1 = 4; x_3 - x_1 = 10 \} &
    \text{V\tsup{7} chords} \\ %
  %
  S_3 &= \{ (x_1, x_2, x_3)\ |\ x_2 - x_1 = 4; x_3 - x_1 = 11 \} &
    \text{I\tsup{7} chords}
\end{align*}
\vspace{-3em}

\noindent The definitions are intuitive, and have clear musical relevance:
ii\tsup{7} chords have a minor third and minor seventh, V\tsup{7} chords have
a major third and minor seventh, and I\tsup{7} chords have a major third and
major seventh. Defining the chords this way rather than as four-note set
classes offers the great advantage of flexibility. Using the ordered-triple
representation, the progressions \h{Dm7}--\h{G7}--\h{Cmaj7} and
\h{Dm9(b5)}--\h{G7b13s9b9}--\h{Cmaj7s11} are understood as equivalent, since
the roots, thirds, and sevenths are the same: both progressions are
represented $(2, 5, 0)$--$(7, 11, 5)$--$(0, 4, 11)$.



% }}}


\end{document}

% vim:fdm=marker
