%% Chapter 3

\chapter{Thirds Spaces and Parsimony}

The space developed in the last chapter was organized primarily in descending
fifths, and works well for most tonal jazz. Motion by thirds, both major and
minor, also occur less frequently and will be the focus of this chapter.
Harmonic motion organized in thirds is one of the main emphases of non-jazz
transformational theorists; this focus will permit the opportunity to
connect developments in jazz harmony with analogous developments in
nineteenth-century harmony.

\section{Minor-third Substitutions}
\label{sec:minor-third-subst}

\subsection{Formalism}
\label{sec:m3-formalism}

The most common dominant substitution in jazz is undoubtedly the tritone
substitution (discussed in Section \ref{sec:tf-space-tritones}), but the
minor-third substitution---sometimes called the backdoor substitution---is also
relatively common, especially in the bebop era. By way of example, Figure
\ref{mts:ladybird-changes} gives the changes to opening five bars of Tadd
Dameron's ``Lady Bird.'' Normally the progression in mm.~3--4 would function
as a \tf in the key of \Eflat, but in m.~5 here it resolves instead to C. The
expected \tf in C (\h{Dm7}--\h{G7}) is transposed up a minor third, becoming
\h{Fm7}--\h{Bb7}.

\begin{figure}[tbp]
  \centerGraphic[width=22em]{eps/ch3/ladybird-changes.pdf}
  \caption{Changes to ``Lady Bird'' (Tadd Dameron), mm.~1--5.}
  \label{mts:ladybird-changes}
\end{figure}

The identical tendency tones shared by tritone-substituted dominants makes
them relatively easy to understand, but minor-third substitution is more
difficult. Jazz harmony textbooks often do not provide an explanation for the
phenomenon: Jerry Coker simply states that ``the I chord \ldots\ is often
preceded by \h{IV-7} to \h{bVII7}, instead of the usual \h{V7}
chord.''\footcite[82]{coker:elements} The \emph{Berklee Book of Jazz Harmony}
places the \h{bVII7} chord in its chapter on ``modal interchange'' (what might
also be called modal mixture), and notes that its function is ambiguous, since
the chord has dominant quality but not dominant function, since it lacks the
leading tone.\footcite[123--24]{berklee:harmony} Unlike the tritone
substitution, there is no strong voice-leading rational for the minor-third
substitution; it is simply a progression that bebop players often used, and
that we as analysts must now contend with.

There is, though, a certain similarity between the tritone and minor-third
substitutions: just as the tritone evenly divides the octave, so too the minor
third evenly divides the tritone. In the previous chapter, introducing tritone
substitutes to \tf space effectively divided the space in half, splitting the
complete space into ``front'' and ``back'' sides. Repeating the process again
results in a space that looks something like Figure \ref{mts:m3-space} (which
we will call ``m3 space''). The introduction of minor thirds once again
changes the topology of the space. This is somewhat easier to see by focusing
again only on the centrally-located dominant seventh chords; while the tritone
version of \tf space is topologically equivalent to a Möbius strip (recall
Figure \ref{tft:mobius-dominants}), the minor-thirds version of the space is
equivalent to a torus (see Figure \ref{mts:m3-torus}).\fn{mts-1}

\begin{figure}[tbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/ch3/m3-space.pdf}
  \caption[The complete minor-thirds representation of \tf space (m3 space).]{The
    complete minor-thirds representation of \tf space (\ii chords omitted on
    rear levels for clarity), or m3 space.}
  \label{mts:m3-space}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}[tbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/ch3/m3-torus.pdf}
  \caption{The toroidal center of m3 space (the m3-torus).}
  \label{mts:m3-torus}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{mts:m3-torus} looks remarkably similar to a more familiar toroidal
figure common in music theory: the neo-Riemannian Tonnetz. Despite the surface
similarity though, the two are quite distinct. Like the Tonnetz, the dominant
sevenths at the center of m3 space are arranged into axes of perfect fifths
(verticals), minor thirds (horizontals), and major thirds (northwest-southeast
diagonals, not shown in Figure \ref{mts:m3-torus}).\fn{mts-2} Crucially though, the
vertices in the m3-torus are dominant seventh chords (ordered triples), not
individual notes; the m3-torus does not represent a parsimonious voice-leading
space. The neo-Riemannian Tonnetz can also be drawn to represent triads instead of
individual notes, but the resulting graph (Douthett and Steinbach's
``chicken-wire torus'') no longer resembles the m3-torus here.\fn{mts-3}

The minor-thirds arrangement of \tf space makes it easy to define a
transformation to represent the minor-third substitution (which we will call
BD, for ``backdoor''):%
%
\begin{displaymath}
    \mathrm{BD}(X\,) = Y\text{, where}\ X = (x_r, x_t, x_s) \in \Sdom
    \text{ and}\
    Y = (\,y_r, y_t, y_s) = (x_r + 2, x_s - 4, x_t - 3) \in \Smaj
\end{displaymath}%
%
Musically, there is no compelling reason to define BD such that the third is
calculated from the previous chords seventh and vice versa; there is no
voice-leading connection between them as there is in the TF transformation.
Defining them this way, however, allows the same function to model both the
transformation from minor to dominant seventh and from dominant to major
seventh.\fn{mts-4} In the space, BD is represented as a diagonal line moving
``frontward'' between two layers; see Figure \ref{mts:bd-transformation}. With
this definition, we can easily understand the progression in mm.~3--5 of
``Lady Bird'': \h{Fm7} \TFarrow\ \h{Bb7} $\xrightarrow{\mathrm{BD}}$\ \h{CM7}.

\begin{figure}[tbp]
  \centerGraphic[width=20em]{eps/ch3/bd-transformation.pdf}
  \caption[The BD transformation in m3 space.]{The BD transformation from
    \caph{Bb7} to \caph{CM7} in m3 space.}
  \label{mts:bd-transformation}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Analytical Interlude: Joe Henderson, “Isotope”}
\label{sec:henderson-isotope}
\FloatBarrier

Minor thirds space, as it has been developed so far, may seem like merely
another arrangement of \tf space. One might reasonably ask why it merits a
section in this chapter, instead of being merely an extension of the space
like those explored in Section \ref{sec:tf-extensions}. In a situation
parallel to that of 19th-century chromatic tonality, jazz after 1960 began to
use more chromatic progressions---\allowbreak especially those built on
thirds---in what still may be called tonal jazz: in these compositions, there
is still a prevailing sense of key, but local harmonic progressions depart
from the descending-fifths norm of earlier jazz.\fn{mts-5} Exploring
minor-thirds space, and understanding why it merits special discussion, is
best shown by way of an example: Joe Henderson's composition
``Isotope.''\fn{mts-6}

The solo changes for ``Isotope'' are given in Figure
\ref{mts:isotope-solo-changes}.\fn{mts-7} The tune is a modified 12-bar blues,
and contains the typical lowered seventh of the blues dialect: all of the
chords (even the tonic C chords) are major-minor sevenths. While we could
analyze this set of changes in the ``blues \tf space'' of Section
\ref{sec:other-kinds-tonic}, using the m3-torus of Figure \ref{mts:m3-torus}
directly will help to highlight how minor thirds space can be used in analysis.

\begin{figure}[tbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/xxx.pdf}
  \caption{Solo changes for Joe Henderson, ``Isotope.''}
  \label{mts:isotope-solo-changes}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[tbp]
  \centerGraphic{eps/ch3/isotope-torus.pdf}
  \caption{An analysis of ``Isotope''(solo changes) in the m3-torus.}
  \label{mts:isotope-torus}
\end{figure}

An analysis of ``Isotope'' in the m3-torus is given in Figure
\ref{mts:isotope-torus}. The solo changes begin with a tonic major-minor
seventh chord for four bars, before moving to the IV chord in m.~5. Instead of
moving directly from IV to I in m.~7, Henderson moves first to \Bflat,
resulting in a variant of the backdoor progression \h{Bb7}--\h{C7} in
mm.~6--7. (We could easily define a BD\tsub{blues} transformation, similar to
TF\tsub{blues} from the last chapter; for now, we can simply understand this
variant as BD $\odot$ \textsc{7th}.) This tonic \h{C7} is extended by moving
to \h{A7}, a minor third away. What would be a string of $T_5$ operations,
\h{A7}--\h{D7}--\h{G7}--\h{C7}, is disrupted slightly by the tritone
substitution of \h{Ab7} for \h{D7} (represented in the m3-torus by
replacing a chord with the chord two spaces to its left or right). Once the
progression returns to the tonic \h{C7} in m.~11, Henderson uses a complete
minor-third cycle as a turnaround, maintaining tonic function for two measures
before beginning the next chorus.

% xxx check on this functional analysis

The logic of the minor-third substitution means that the \h{Bb7} chord in m.~6
is understood as a substitute for true dominant \h{G7}. Likewise, the \h{A7}
chord in m.~8 seems to substitute for the tonic in the same way; in an
ordinary 12-bar blues, mm.~7--8 would both contain tonic. This correspondence
suggests an interesting possibility: the top row of harmonies in Figure
\ref{mts:isotope-torus} all seem to have tonic function, while the two chords
used in the bottom row both act as dominants. The harmonies in the middle row,
then, seem to serve as predominants, appearing in ``Isotope'' just before the
\h{G7} and \h{Bb7} chords.

This functional analysis helps to make sense of the unusual turnaround in the
last two bars of the tune. Turnarounds are inherently prolongational
structures, a way of providing harmonic interest between a chorus-concluding
tonic and the next chorus-beginning tonic.\fn{mts-8} While most turnarounds
use functional harmony (a \tfo progression or some variant), Henderson uses a
non-functional minor-third cycle. Coming as it does at the end of the chorus,
which makes liberal use of minor-third substitutions, we are primed to hear
this cycle as a unique way of prolonging (or maintaining) tonic harmony
without making use of functional harmonic progression.

Henderson's tour of the m3-torus in ``Isotope'' is interesting for a number of
reasons. First, he is able to create a sense of tonal function and harmonic
progression while using only major-minor (``dominant'') seventh chords. This
is a feature common to many blues tunes, but is stronger in ``Isotope'' given
the pervasive use of minor-third substitutions. Second, this is a tune that
does not seem to make much sense in the descending-fifths \tf space of the
previous chapter. While certainly some of the tune makes use of harmonic
motion in fifths, the backdoor progression in mm.~6--7 and the final
turnaround would appear as seemingly random, non-sensical jumps in the space.

Finally, the progression of ``Isotope'' is not one that is easily explained
using neo-Riemannian theory as it is usually applied to classical music.
Constructing a Tonnetz usually relies on having two varieties of musical objects
under consideration (commonly major and minor triads, or half-diminished and
dominant seventh chords), while our m3-torus only uses major-minor sevenths.
Neo-Riemannian theories often focus on smooth voice leading; measured in these
terms, the \h{Bb7} and \h{C7} chords of mm.~5--6 are quite distant from one
another, despite their functional equivalence to a V--I motion.\fn{mts-9} The
turnaround, most unusual from a tonal perspective, is actually quite typical
of patterns usually analyzed in neo-Riemannian terms: the major-minor sevenths
found there are all minimal perturbations of a single diminished seventh
chord, and each can be connected to the next with a minimal amount of
voice-leading work (two semitones moving in opposite directions).\fn{mts-10}

%%% Local Variables: %%%
%%% mode: latex %%%
%%% TeX-master: "../diss" %%%
%%% End: %%%
